Use envvars NIX_CACHE_HOME, NIX_CONFIG_HOME, NIX_DATA_HOME, NIX_STATE_HOME if defined (#11351)
NixOS/nix: doc/manual/rl-next/add-nix-state-home.md

---
synopsis: Use envvars NIX_CACHE_HOME, NIX_CONFIG_HOME, NIX_DATA_HOME, NIX_STATE_HOME if defined
prs: [11351]
---

> Look for 4 new environment variables: NIX_CACHE_HOME, NIX_CONFIG_HOME, NIX_DATA_HOME, NIX_STATE_HOME.
> If one of them is defined, it takes precedence over its respective XDG envvar.
> 
> This provides more fine-grained control over where Nix looks for files, and allows to have a stand-alone Nix
> environment, which only uses files in a specific directory, and doesn't touch any global user configuration.
> 
> For example, when [`use-xdg-base-directories`] is enabled, the configuration directory is:
> 
> 1. `$NIX_CONFIG_HOME`, if it is defined
> 2. Otherwise, `$XDG_CONFIG_HOME/nix`, if `XDG_CONFIG_HOME` is defined
> 3. Otherwise, `~/.config/nix`.
> 
> Likewise for the state and cache directories.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Added new environment variables:

- `NIX_CACHE_HOME`
- `NIX_CONFIG_HOME`
- `NIX_DATA_HOME`
- `NIX_STATE_HOME`

Each, if defined, takes precedence over the corresponding [XDG environment variable](@docroot@/command-ref/env-common.md#xdg-base-directories).
This provides more fine-grained control over where Nix looks for files, and allows to have a stand-alone Nix environment, which only uses files in a specific directory, and doesn't interfere with the user environment.
```

I recommend against duplicating reference documentation, and against having any sort of reference documentation in the release notes: documentation will inevitably change, but we have a (currently unwritten) policy of not changing release notes. Changing information in two places is generally bad.
